# Parser Reference

A parser's purpose is to recognize a string of tokens conforming to a grammar,
and to optionally transform it into something else.

## Parser Section

Parser declarations are contained in a parser section signaled by the `@parser`
keyword.

```lox
@parser

// Parser declarations
```

## Rules

Parser rules are the fundamental building blocks of the parser. They define
transformations of terminals (tokens) and non-terminals (other rules) and can
themselves be referenced as terms in other rule productions, including
recursively. The parser rule syntax resembles the
[extended-Backus-Naur form](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Extended_Backus%E2%80%93Naur_form)
(EBNF).

The Lox rule syntax itself can be expressed concisely in Lox:
```lox
rule      = '@start'? ID '=' @list(prod, '|') NL
prod      = term_card+ qualif?
          | '@empty'

term_card = term card?
term      = ID | LITERAL | '@error' | list
list      = '@list' '(' term ',' term ')'
card      = '*' | '*!' | '+' | '?'
qualif    = '@left' '(' NUM ')'
          | '@right' '(' NUM ')'
```
Let's take a closer look at the following example rule:

```lox
prod = term_card+ qualif?
     | '@empty'

```

* `prod` is the name of the rule.
* `term_card+ qualif?` and `'@empty'` are the rule's productions.
* `term_card+` and `qualif?` are terms in the first production.
* `term_card` and `qualif` reference other rules.
* `+` is a cardinality, indicating that one or more `term_card`s are expected.
  Likewise, `?` indicates that zero or one `qualif` is expected.
* `'@empty'` is a token, referenced by its literal form.

**Notes:**

* Rule names must be valid [Go
identifiers](https://go.dev/ref/spec#Identifiers) with the following additional
restrictions:
  - **Must not** start with an underscore (`_`).
  - **Must not** contain consecutive underscores.

### Line Continuation

Rules are terminated by an end-of-line. The line-continuation backslash `\` can
be used to split a rule into multiple lines. The backlash can be omitted when
the vertical bar `|` is the next line's first token. In this case, the
line-continuation is implicit.                   

For example:

```lox
term = ID | \
       LITERAL | \
       '@error' | \ 
       list
```
Is equivalent to:
```lox
term = ID
     | LITERAL
     | '@error'
     | list
```
It is idiomatic to use the latter form, and to only use the `\` when a rule
cannot be split at a `|`.

### Start Rule

One, and only one rule, must be marked as the root or start rule using the
`@start` keyword. The start rule is the parser's goal; when the parser reduces
the start rule, parsing completes successfully.

Example:
```lox
@start program = statement*
```

### Empty Production

A production that matches the empty string - often represented in formal grammar
by the Greek letter episilon (ε) - must use the `@empty` keyword in place of
terms.

Example:
```lox
optional_number = NUMBER | @empty
```
In this example, the rule `optional_number` can be reduced by matching a `NUMBER`
token, or by matching nothing at all (i.e., the empty string).

## Term Cardinality

A term can be annotated with a cardinality modifier, which determines how many
instances of the term can be matched. Cardinality is used to specify optional,
repeated, or required patterns within a rule. 

### Optional (?)

`?` indicates that a term is optional.

Example:

```lox
some_rule = some_term?

// Generated by Lox:
some_term? = some_term
           | @empty
```

### One or More (+)

`+` indicates that a term can be matched one or more times.

Example:
```lox
some_rule = some_term+

// Generated by Lox:
some_term+ = some_term+ some_term
           | some_term
```

### Zero or More (*)

`*` indicates that a term can be matched zero or more times.

Example:
```lox
some_rule = some_term*

// Generated by Lox:
some_term*  = some_term+?
some_term+? = some_term+
            | @empty
some_term+  = some_term+ some_term
            | some_term
```

### List (@list)

`@list(elem, sep)` indicates that the term will match `elem` one or more times
while separated by `sep`.

Example:
```lox
some_rule = @list(some_term, ',')

// Generated by Lox:
@list(some_term, ',') = @list(some_term, ',') ',' some_term
                      | some_term
```

`@list` can be further qualified with a `?` to match a list of zero or more
elements.

### Precedence and Associativity

The following grammar is ambiguous. Attempting to analyze it will fail it with
the error: `grammar has conflicts`:

```lox
expr = expr '+' expr
     | expr '*' expr
     | NUMBER
```

See [Parser Conflicts](./parser_conflicts) for a general explanation about the
subject. 

Conflicts related to operator precedence can be resolved using precedence and
associatity qualifiers:


```lox
expr = expr '+' expr  @left(1)
     | expr '*' expr  @left(2)
     | NUMBER
```

The `@left` qualifiers in the grammar tells `lox` that if it encounters a
conflict between `expr '+' expr` and `expr '*' expr`, then the latter should
take precendence over the former. 

{.notice}
Precedence qualifiers in Lox are used to resolve ambiguities **within a
single rule**. Precedence qualifiers have no effect if an ambiguity spans
multiple rules, and resolution will likely require grammar refactoring.

When resolving conflicts in operator precedence, it's also important to consider
the associativity of the operators. Associativity determines how operators of
the same precedence level are grouped in the absence of parentheses.

#### Left Associativity (@left)
For left-associative operators like addition and subtraction, when multiple
instances of the operator appear in a row, the parser groups them from the left.

Example:
```lox
expr = expr '+' expr  @left(1)
     | NUMBER
```
Given the input `1 + 2 + 3`, the parser processes it like this:
```
(1 + 2) + 3
```
This is due to the `@left` qualifier, which causes the parser to reduce the
first `expr` before considering the next.

#### Right Associativity (@right)
For right-associative operators like exponentiation or assignment, the parser groups the expressions from the right.

Example:
```lox
expr = expr '^' expr  @right(1)
     | NUMBER
```
For the input `2 ^ 3 ^ 4`, the parser groups it like this:
```
2 ^ (3 ^ 4)
```
